---
layout: post
permalink: /acetoxy001
title:  "Acetoxy #001 - Weeks 1-3 of Science Olympiad Robot Tour"
author: Aric Volman
tags: "Robot Tour"
---

# In the beginning...

It all began because I was interested in a little event called Robot Tour. The challenge is to create a robot that can navigate a pre-programmed path, reaching 3 checkpoints in at least 55 seconds. Although this may sound trivial, it is not. Several things stop us from obtaining a perfect score. The classical robot has two motors and no encoders/odometry, and its problems follow:

- The robot must control its speed precisely, or else it will be inaccurate in every move
- The robot has no idea where it is if it can't record its position
- The robot loses accuracy when turning 90 degrees because it makes a wide swing

I settled on a three-wheel design, which is a challenge. Here are some of the benefits:

- It is omnidirectional, meaning it can move in any direction
- Turns are not an issue anymore, because it can change direction without changing the heading
- Less power draw than mecanum (500 mA draw per motor, 3x motor = 1.5 A, less than 2 A limit for AA batteries)

# CAD-A-Thon

I began by designing a two motor design with two motors. Then, I thought of all of the above points and the benefits of a three-motor frame. Thus, I came up with this:

Some aspects of the design:

- Uses a pegboard design, which makes the robot more modular (can add sensors and dowel later on)
- Motor mounts are screwed onto pegboard with #8-32 or possible M4
- Motor covers are attached via M3 screws with heat inserts
- Shaft collars use available M4/Meccano screwS (from building kit)
- Most things are 3D printable

It is estimated to cost around 12 hours of printing time in total for the entire robot. This is a trade-off between time and money (a custom fabrication would cost a lot).
Other essentials (such as RP 2040 and breadboard + battery) will be velcroed on.

# Wheel Challenges

The design and fabrication of the wheel is the most challenging part of this entire project. We need a 40 mm diameter omni wheel that is cheap and easy enough to fabricate. However, entirely 3D printing it will not cut it.

## A World of Layers

The primary design is a three-layered wheel. It is intended to become permanently bonded together with an epoxy or superglue adhesive. M1 or M2 bolts are rare, and M3 and M4 will not fit in the hub of this form factor. Only glue can work! There are alignment holes, designed to fit paper clips. The layers will be aligned well with the paper clips. Worse come to worse, we can cut the paper clips off!

The print of the central thin slice (housing the wheelets) was great. Thin slices and features are much stronger than expected, and the thin geometry (connecting parts) holds up well in the real world. The thin slice is ready to be integrated with the rest of the wheel.

## First Mold Prototype

At first, I thought that the wheelets could be printed out of TPU. However, it turns out that TPU is too slippery of a rubber for gym floors and wheels. Silicone is the best and most ideal rubber for the job. The challenge is getting silicone into a form usable for wheels. I tried creating a sandwich-style mold, splitting the wheel into an upper and lower half. This would be problematic because the shaft needed to be set in place as well (can't shove the shaft into the upper half of the mold). This mold only molded one wheelet, which was inefficient (need to do 24 times/4x2x3). The process would be too slow and the silicone tube would dry out. Also, the M4 screws didn't fit too well.

Additionally, I experimented with an experimental "spindle". The idea was, that by providing a hard base for spinning, the wheelets would be better and more efficient. However, there isn't enough silicone to go around to properly cover the spindles. So, it is best not to use the spindles.

## Second Mold

I fixed several of these processes by designing a four-wheelet mold. This can efficiently mold four at a time, dramatically reducing time costs. It only takes 2 hours to print vs. 1 hour of the original design, so it is more efficient. Additionally, I have increased the tolerance of the M4 screws so that they fit much better. A paper clip will act as the axle of the wheelet, going through the mold. The print is just frankly beautiful and genius.

## Acetoxy Choices

I am choosing acetoxy silicone for its simplicity and ease of use. It typically has a 10 minute tooling time. It is unknown whether or not the wheelets can be removed from the mold after setting - they need to cure as well. Silicone forms a thin shell of set polymer, on top of a sea of goop. The goop can set quicker with some corn starch, because more water and oxygen is introduced to the silicone. I am thinking of adding yellow food coloring for a "bumblebee" color scheme (black and yellow). In several weeks, we will see where this takes me...
